docs/devtools.md, before:

# Developer Tools

This section describes tooling and features included in Koku to assist developers contributing to Koku.

## Environment Variables

Koku makes use of environment variables to configure features and application capabilities.

In the repository, there is an `.env.example` file with sample environment settings. The `.env` file is used by Django's tools as well as Koku's scripting. It is the recommended way to configure your local development environment settings.

This section documents environment variables that may be of interest to developers.

`DEVELOPMENT=(True|False)` - Enables development features. Not for
production use. `DEVELOPMENT_IDENTITY=(JSON)` - A JSON Object
representing a User

## Authentication

When `DEVELOPMENT` is not set, Koku expects to use an external service to handle authentication and access control for most API endpoints.

When `DEVELOPMENT` is set, the development middleware is enabled. This allows passing in custom identity information into Koku for development and testing purposes using the `DEVELOPMENT_IDENTITY` variable.

Example `DEVELOPMENT_IDENTITY` object:

```json
{
    "identity": {
        "account_number": "10001",
        "type": "User",
        "user": {
            "username": "user_dev",
            "email": "user_dev@foo.com",
            "is_org_admin": False
            "access": {
                "aws.account": {
                    "read": ["1234567890AB", "234567890AB1"]
                }
                "gcp.account": {
                    "read": ["*"]
                }
                "gcp.project": {
                    "read": ["*"]
                }
                "azure.subscription_guid": {
                    "read": ["*"]
                }
                "openshift.cluster": {
                    "read": ["*"]
                }
                "openshift.project": {
                    "read": ["*"]
                }
                "openshift.node": {
                    "read": ["*"]
                }
            }
        },
    },
    "entitlements": {"cost_management": {"is_entitled": True}},
}
```

> **Note:**
> This example is pretty-printed for readability. When setting the
> enviroment variable, it should be collapsed to one single line.

## Trino Tips

Trino is an SQL query engine, but not an SQL database. What does that mean? Traditional databases typically consist of a query engine and a storage engine. Trino is just a query engine and does not store data. Inside of koku, our download workers will retrieve cost data from the cloud providers in the form of CSVs. During processing we convert these csv files to parquet files (Look for the following function in the codebase: `convert_csv_to_parquet`).

After the files are converted they are then sent up to an S3 bucket. During runtime the Trino coordinator utilizes the existing HIVE metastore metadata and files residing in storage to query the files for data.

Trino Specific Env Vars
```
S3_BUCKET_NAME=koku-bucket
S3_ENDPOINT=http://kokuminio:9000
S3_ACCESS_KEY=kokuminioaccess
S3_SECRET=kokuminiosecret
S3_BUCKET_PATH=data
TRINO_DATE_STEP=31
```

Additional Reads:

- https://trino.io/blog/2020/10/20/intro-to-hive-connector.html#trino-runtime-replaces-hive-runtime

## MinIO
MinIO is the file storage location we use locally. Since, we query the parquet files based off the S3 path, we use this tool locally to see the csv & parquet files are in their expected place. It will also allow you to download them.

Minio UI:

- http://127.0.0.1:9090/minio/

The username & password is set inside of the .env file
```
S3_ACCESS_KEY=kokuminioaccess
S3_SECRET=kokuminiosecret
```

## Trino Coordinator

This is the brain of the Trino installation and the node the client connects to when submitting statements for execution. The coordinator keeps track of the activity on each worker and coordinates the execution of a query.The coordinator creates a logical model of a query involving a series of stages, which is then translated into a series of connected tasks running on a cluster of Trino workers.

You can use the trino UI to see the queries run in trino:
- http://127.0.0.1:8080/ui/

You can also manually run queries inside of the trino container
```
docker exec -it trino trino --catalog hive --schema org1234567 --user admin --debug
SHOW CREATE TABLE <table_name>;
```

Additional Reads:

- https://trino.io/docs/current/overview/concepts.html#coordinator


## PostgreSQL Tips:

**Connect to PostgreSQL**
```
PGPASSWORD=postgres psql postgres -U postgres -h localhost -p 15432
```

Another alternative is to configure a [connection service file](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/libpq-pgservice.html).

Example `~/.pg_service.conf`:
```
[koku_db]
host=localhost
dbname=postgres
port=5432
user=postgres
password=postgres
```

You can then connect through setting the `PGSERVICE` variable:
```
PGSERVICE=koku_db psql
```


**Commonly used psql commands**

1. Set search Schema: `SET search_path TO org1234567`
2. find datatable: `\dt` or `\dt reporting_ocpgcp*`
3. Tidy up display: `\x auto`
4. List columns for a table: `\d+ reporting_ocpusagelineitem_daily_summary`

**Commonly used SQL pieces**

Search for Tag Key
```
WHERE pod_labels ? 'environment';
```

**Extensions**

We use PostgreSQL's [uuid-ossp extension](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/uuid-ossp.html) to generate uuids. However, this extension is not enabled by default when connecting through a terminal. If you ever need the extension locally, it can can be enabled with the following command:

```
ALTER EXTENSION "uuid-ossp" SET SCHEMA org1234567;
```

Example:
```
postgres=# SELECT uuid_generate_v4();
           uuid_generate_v4
--------------------------------------
 cde6c80d-ac41-42a2-b1db-bf941db2b7c8
```


## Jinja Templated SQL

We have a development script that will replace the Jinja variables inside of a template file.

Example
```
python3 dev/scripts/render_templated_sql.py -f /path/to/template.sql -b 11
```

## Debugging Django ORM

The following code snippit will provide you with queries generated by Django that are able to be copy and pasted into PostgreSQL.

```
from django.db import connection
readable_queries = []
for dikt in connection.queries:
    for key, item in dikt.items():
        item = item.replace("\"", "")
        item = item.replace("\\", "")
        readable_queries.append({key: item})
LOG.info(readable_queries)
```

If you are debugging queries generated for the report endpoints, a good place to put this code is in the `ReportView` class since it is the parent class for all the views.

## How to check Redis Keys

```
docker exec -it koku_redis redis-cli
127.0.0.1:6379> select 1
OK
127.0.0.1:6379[1]> keys *
```

Additionally, [here is a small example](https://github.com/project-koku/koku/pull/4105) of how to test Redis cache changes.


## Unleash ##

The default credentials for Unleash are:

```
username: admin
password: unleash4all
```

Commit message:

add list of managed vs external tables and docs section on trino migrations

docs/devtools.md, after:

# Developer Tools

This section describes tooling and features included in Koku to assist developers contributing to Koku.

## Environment Variables

Koku makes use of environment variables to configure features and application capabilities.

In the repository, there is an `.env.example` file with sample environment settings. The `.env` file is used by Django's tools as well as Koku's scripting. It is the recommended way to configure your local development environment settings.

This section documents environment variables that may be of interest to developers.

`DEVELOPMENT=(True|False)` - Enables development features. Not for
production use. `DEVELOPMENT_IDENTITY=(JSON)` - A JSON Object
representing a User

## Authentication

When `DEVELOPMENT` is not set, Koku expects to use an external service to handle authentication and access control for most API endpoints.

When `DEVELOPMENT` is set, the development middleware is enabled. This allows passing in custom identity information into Koku for development and testing purposes using the `DEVELOPMENT_IDENTITY` variable.

Example `DEVELOPMENT_IDENTITY` object:

```json
{
    "identity": {
        "account_number": "10001",
        "type": "User",
        "user": {
            "username": "user_dev",
            "email": "user_dev@foo.com",
            "is_org_admin": False
            "access": {
                "aws.account": {
                    "read": ["1234567890AB", "234567890AB1"]
                }
                "gcp.account": {
                    "read": ["*"]
                }
                "gcp.project": {
                    "read": ["*"]
                }
                "azure.subscription_guid": {
                    "read": ["*"]
                }
                "openshift.cluster": {
                    "read": ["*"]
                }
                "openshift.project": {
                    "read": ["*"]
                }
                "openshift.node": {
                    "read": ["*"]
                }
            }
        },
    },
    "entitlements": {"cost_management": {"is_entitled": True}},
}
```

> **Note:**
> This example is pretty-printed for readability. When setting the
> enviroment variable, it should be collapsed to one single line.

## Trino Tips

Trino is an SQL query engine, but not an SQL database. What does that mean? Traditional databases typically consist of a query engine and a storage engine. Trino is just a query engine and does not store data. Inside of koku, our download workers will retrieve cost data from the cloud providers in the form of CSVs. During processing we convert these csv files to parquet files (Look for the following function in the codebase: `convert_csv_to_parquet`).

After the files are converted they are then sent up to an S3 bucket. During runtime the Trino coordinator utilizes the existing HIVE metastore metadata and files residing in storage to query the files for data.

Trino Specific Env Vars
```
S3_BUCKET_NAME=koku-bucket
S3_ENDPOINT=http://kokuminio:9000
S3_ACCESS_KEY=kokuminioaccess
S3_SECRET=kokuminiosecret
S3_BUCKET_PATH=data
TRINO_DATE_STEP=31
```

Additional Reads:

- https://trino.io/blog/2020/10/20/intro-to-hive-connector.html#trino-runtime-replaces-hive-runtime

## Trino Migrations
Trino migrations are run using the `migrate_trino.py` script, there are a few standard operations for the migrations. A list of external vs managed tables should be maintained in the `migrate_trino.py` script. The following describes which actions should be performed on which tables:
1. Drop a table
    * This should only be performed on tables that point to data stored in an external location as dropping these tables will not result in data loss.
    * External tables are identifiable in trino by using the `SHOW CREATE TABLE <table_name>` command. The external tables will have an `external_location` like this:
        ```
        SHOW CREATE TABLE aws_line_items;
        ...
        WITH (
            external_location = 's3a://koku-bucket/data/parquet/org1234567/AWS',
            format = 'PARQUET',
            partitioned_by = ARRAY['source','year','month']
        )
        ```
2. Adding/Dropping a column from a table
    * This should be performed on managed tables, tables without an external store. Dropping these tables would result in data loss.
    * Managed tables are identifiable in trino by using the `SHOW CREATE TABLE <table_name>` command. The managed tables will *NOT* have an `external_location` like this:
        ```
        SHOW CREATE TABLE reporting_ocpawscostlineitem_project_daily_summary;
        ...
        WITH (
            format = 'PARQUET',
            partitioned_by = ARRAY['aws_source','ocp_source','year','month','day']
        )
        ```

## MinIO
MinIO is the file storage location we use locally. Since, we query the parquet files based off the S3 path, we use this tool locally to see the csv & parquet files are in their expected place. It will also allow you to download them.

Minio UI:

- http://127.0.0.1:9090/minio/

The username & password is set inside of the .env file
```
S3_ACCESS_KEY=kokuminioaccess
S3_SECRET=kokuminiosecret
```

## Trino Coordinator

This is the brain of the Trino installation and the node the client connects to when submitting statements for execution. The coordinator keeps track of the activity on each worker and coordinates the execution of a query.The coordinator creates a logical model of a query involving a series of stages, which is then translated into a series of connected tasks running on a cluster of Trino workers.

You can use the trino UI to see the queries run in trino:
- http://127.0.0.1:8080/ui/

You can also manually run queries inside of the trino container
```
docker exec -it trino trino --catalog hive --schema org1234567 --user admin --debug
SHOW CREATE TABLE <table_name>;
```

Additional Reads:

- https://trino.io/docs/current/overview/concepts.html#coordinator


## PostgreSQL Tips:

**Connect to PostgreSQL**
```
PGPASSWORD=postgres psql postgres -U postgres -h localhost -p 15432
```

Another alternative is to configure a [connection service file](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/libpq-pgservice.html).

Example `~/.pg_service.conf`:
```
[koku_db]
host=localhost
dbname=postgres
port=5432
user=postgres
password=postgres
```

You can then connect through setting the `PGSERVICE` variable:
```
PGSERVICE=koku_db psql
```


**Commonly used psql commands**

1. Set search Schema: `SET search_path TO org1234567`
2. find datatable: `\dt` or `\dt reporting_ocpgcp*`
3. Tidy up display: `\x auto`
4. List columns for a table: `\d+ reporting_ocpusagelineitem_daily_summary`

**Commonly used SQL pieces**

Search for Tag Key
```
WHERE pod_labels ? 'environment';
```

**Extensions**

We use PostgreSQL's [uuid-ossp extension](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/uuid-ossp.html) to generate uuids. However, this extension is not enabled by default when connecting through a terminal. If you ever need the extension locally, it can can be enabled with the following command:

```
ALTER EXTENSION "uuid-ossp" SET SCHEMA org1234567;
```

Example:
```
postgres=# SELECT uuid_generate_v4();
           uuid_generate_v4
--------------------------------------
 cde6c80d-ac41-42a2-b1db-bf941db2b7c8
```


## Jinja Templated SQL

We have a development script that will replace the Jinja variables inside of a template file.

Example
```
python3 dev/scripts/render_templated_sql.py -f /path/to/template.sql -b 11
```

## Debugging Django ORM

The following code snippit will provide you with queries generated by Django that are able to be copy and pasted into PostgreSQL.

```
from django.db import connection
readable_queries = []
for dikt in connection.queries:
    for key, item in dikt.items():
        item = item.replace("\"", "")
        item = item.replace("\\", "")
        readable_queries.append({key: item})
LOG.info(readable_queries)
```

If you are debugging queries generated for the report endpoints, a good place to put this code is in the `ReportView` class since it is the parent class for all the views.

## How to check Redis Keys

```
docker exec -it koku_redis redis-cli
127.0.0.1:6379> select 1
OK
127.0.0.1:6379[1]> keys *
```

Additionally, [here is a small example](https://github.com/project-koku/koku/pull/4105) of how to test Redis cache changes.


## Unleash ##

The default credentials for Unleash are:

```
username: admin
password: unleash4all
```
