docs/install.md, before:

# Installation

Project Koku is divided into logical components. To achieve a fully
functional application, it requires the deployment of multiple
micro-applications.

The primary applications for Project Koku are:

- Koku API (Reporting and Query API service)
- Koku UI (Front-end Web UI)
- Masu (Data ingestion service)

For development and testing, Project Koku also includes:

- Nise (Test data generator)

This guide will focus on deploying Project Koku into an existing
[OpenShift](https://www.okd.io/) cluster.

## Deploying the Koku API

The Koku application contains two components - a web service and
database.

**Docker Compose**

The Koku API can also be deployed with Docker Compose with the following
steps:

- Create a Docker bridge network named `koku-network`:
    `docker network create koku-network`
- Set AWS credential environment variables: `AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY`
    and `AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID`
- Start koku server and database: `make docker-up`

This command will run database migraitons and start the API server. Once
complete the API server will be running on port 8000 on your localhost.

## Deploying the Koku UI

The Koku-UI application is the web-based frontend for Project Koku. It
is built using [Patternfly](https://www.patternfly.org/) and
[ReactJS](https://reactjs.org/).

Instructions for deploying the Koku UI can be found here:
<https://github.com/project-koku/koku-ui#getting-started>

## Deploying Masu

The Masu application contains several components: a web service,
message bus, and workers. Masu also uses the Koku database.
Configuration and management of the database are controlled from the
Koku API application.

Instructions for deploying Masu can be found here:
<https://github.com/project-koku/masu#getting-started>

Masu can alternatively be deployed with Docker Compose: Follow the steps
above to start the Koku API with Docker Compose

### Start masu services

Run `make docker-up`

To trigger Masu to process data, send a GET request to
`http://localhost:5042/api/cost-management/v1/download/`. You may want
to see Masu logs using `docker logs -f koku-worker`.

Commit message:

docs: Add comprehensive documentation for KOKU_ONPREM_DEPLOYMENT flag
- Add on-premise deployment configuration section to install.md
- Update README.md with on-prem setup instructions
- Create comprehensive feature flags architecture documentation
- Add cross-reference in sources-and-data-ingestion.md
- Document DisabledUnleashClient implementation
- Include testing, usage examples, and migration guide
- Create Helm chart integration guide in ros-helm-chart repo

This documentation supports the on-premise deployment mode introduced
in commit 6475a00c, which adds DisabledUnleashClient for deployments
without access to Red Hat SaaS services (Unleash feature flags).

Documentation includes:
- 500+ line architecture guide (docs/architecture/feature-flags.md)
- Installation and configuration instructions
- Testing procedures and usage examples
- Migration guide from SaaS to on-prem
- Helm chart integration guide (external repo)

Related: koku-onprem-integration branch

docs/install.md, after:

# Installation

Project Koku is divided into logical components. To achieve a fully
functional application, it requires the deployment of multiple
micro-applications.

The primary applications for Project Koku are:

- Koku API (Reporting and Query API service)
- Koku UI (Front-end Web UI)
- Masu (Data ingestion service)

For development and testing, Project Koku also includes:

- Nise (Test data generator)

This guide will focus on deploying Project Koku into an existing
[OpenShift](https://www.okd.io/) cluster.

## Deploying the Koku API

The Koku application contains two components - a web service and
database.

**Docker Compose**

The Koku API can also be deployed with Docker Compose with the following
steps:

- Create a Docker bridge network named `koku-network`:
    `docker network create koku-network`
- Set AWS credential environment variables: `AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY`
    and `AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID`
- Start koku server and database: `make docker-up`

This command will run database migraitons and start the API server. Once
complete the API server will be running on port 8000 on your localhost.

### On-Premise Deployment Configuration

For on-premise deployments without access to Red Hat SaaS services (Unleash feature flags), set the following environment variable:

```bash
export KOKU_ONPREM_DEPLOYMENT=True
```

When enabled, this will:
- Disable the Unleash feature flag client (all feature flags will return `False`)
- Prevent external API calls to the Unleash server
- Use the `DisabledUnleashClient` mock implementation

**Example**:
```bash
export KOKU_ONPREM_DEPLOYMENT=True
make docker-up
```

For standard SaaS deployments, leave this unset or set to `False`.

See [Feature Flags Architecture](architecture/feature-flags.md) for more details.

## Deploying the Koku UI

The Koku-UI application is the web-based frontend for Project Koku. It
is built using [Patternfly](https://www.patternfly.org/) and
[ReactJS](https://reactjs.org/).

Instructions for deploying the Koku UI can be found here:
<https://github.com/project-koku/koku-ui#getting-started>

## Deploying Masu

The Masu application contains several components: a web service,
message bus, and workers. Masu also uses the Koku database.
Configuration and management of the database are controlled from the
Koku API application.

Instructions for deploying Masu can be found here:
<https://github.com/project-koku/masu#getting-started>

Masu can alternatively be deployed with Docker Compose: Follow the steps
above to start the Koku API with Docker Compose

### Start masu services

Run `make docker-up`

To trigger Masu to process data, send a GET request to
`http://localhost:5042/api/cost-management/v1/download/`. You may want
to see Masu logs using `docker logs -f koku-worker`.
